---
layout: post
title: The List
---
#The List

In my last post I talked about the list of 77 things I needed to know before I could call myself a Ruby developer, and where I'm at in my progress. This post is the actual list.

A caveat here. I did not write this list. It was written by my instructor, James Gray of [Gray Productions](graysoftinc.com) and [@JEG2 on Twitter](twitter.com/jeg2). 

James is a former member of the [Ruby Rogues Podcast](devchat.tv/ruby-rogues/), and you can get his take on a lot of these topics in detail there. Ruby Rogues is a great resource for any Ruby developer, at just about any level of experience. I'm slowly working my way through the back catalog.

I have his permission to share the list here. I take no responsibility of his liberal use of the Oxford comma, for which there is no excuse. 

##Programming Lessons
=====================

###Ruby

* Tools: 'pry' and 'ri'
* Data types
* Variables and constants
* Math
* Logical operations
* Flow control
* Error handling
* Defining and using methods
* Positional arguments
* Keyword arguments
* Operator overloading, assignments, predicates, and dangerous methods
* Basic blocks
* Advanced blocks
* Basic iterators
* Advanced iterators
* Basic I/O
* Advanced I/O (with character encoding)
* Regular expression
* Basic objects
* Classes and modules
* Reflection
* Namespaces
* Inheritance
* Encapsulation, polymorphism, and duck typing
* Mix-ins and refinements
* Core, standard library (for serialization, HTTP, etc.), and RubyGems
* Project layout
* Code style
* Dynamic Ruby: open classes, hooks, metaprogramming, and DSL'sl
* Unit testing
* Test doubles
* Test-driven Development (TDD)

I'm purposely skipping:

* Concurrency
* Glue code
* Command-line Ruby
* Debuggers
* 'rdoc'
* 'Struct'


###Strategy

* Our primary job is to manage complexity and abstraction
* Code's primary purpose is to communicate with the reader
* The power of names
* Ya Ain't Gonna Need It (YAGNI)/Less is more/No code beats no code
* Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY)
* The Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)
* The Agile Manifesto
* Patterns
* Data Structures
* Algorithms


###Unix

* Basic shell usage
* Basic SSH usage
* Cron jobs


###Git

* Basic version control


###Web

* Basic HTML
* Basic CSS
* Basic JavaScript and jQuery
* Basic HTTP with 'curl'
* 'Sinatra'
* Forms and parameters
* Templates
* Cookies


###SQL

* Data Description Language (DDL)
* Adding, changing, and deleting records
* Querying records
* Database design: primary keys and normalization
* Database optimization: indexes


###Rails

* 'rails new', project structure, and The Golden Path
* Tools: 'Bundler', 'rails server', and 'rails console'
* Model View Controller (MVC) basics
* Basic ActiveRecord, migrations, and Convention Over Configuration
* Advanced ActiveRecord
* Routing
* RESTful routing
* Controllers
* The session and flash
* Filters
* Views
* Rails style forms
* Helpers
* Ajax
* Building APIs
* Sending email
* Testing Rails
* Plugins and engines

I'm purposefully skipping:

* Caching: 'memcached' and 'Redis'
* Deployment

